README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# mantar - Missingness Alleviation for NeTwork Analysis in R

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

`mantar` provides users with several methods for handling missing data
in the context of network analysis. Currently, these methods are
specifically implemented for network estimation via neighborhood
selection using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC).

## Installation

You can install the development version of mantar from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("pak")
pak::pak("kai-nehler/mantar")
```

After installation the easiest way to get an overview of functions and
capabilities is to use `?mantar` to open the package help-file. You
could also read the rest of this README for an introduction and some
examples.

## Features

As already described, the package currently focuses on network
estimation using **neighborhood selection** with **information
criteria** for model selection in node-wise regressions. This
functionality is available for both complete and incomplete data.

For datasets with missing values, two approaches are implemented:

- **Two-step Expectation-Maximization (EM):** A fast method that
  estimates the correlation matrix via an EM algorithm using the
  `lavaan` package. It performs well when the sample size is very large
  relative to the amount of missingness and the complexity of the
  network.
- **Stacked Multiple Imputation (MI):** A more robust approach across a
  wider range of sample sizes. Multiple imputation is performed using
  predictive mean matching (PMM) with the `mice` package. The imputed
  data sets are stacked into a single data set, and a correlation matrix
  is estimated from this combined data.

Both methods produce a correlation matrix that is then used to estimate
the network via node-wise regressions.

In addition to full network estimation, the package also supports
**stepwise regression search** based on information criteria for a
**single dependent variable**. This regression search is available for
both complete and incomplete data and relies on the same two-step EM or
stacked MI procedures to handle missing values as the network analysis.
While both methods to handle missingness are expected to perform well in
this context, no specific simulation study has been conducted to compare
their effectiveness for single regression modeling, and thus their
relative strengths remain an open question.

## Example

The package includes two dummy datasets that resemble a typical
psychological dataset, where the number of observations is considerably
larger than the number of variables. Although the variables have
descriptive names, these are included solely to make the examples more
engaging - the data themselves are **fully synthetic**. -
`mantar_dummy_full`: Fully observed data (no missing values) -
`mantar_dummy_mis`: Data with missing values

These data sets are intended for examples and testing only.

``` r
library(mantar)

# Load example data
data(mantar_dummy_full)
data(mantar_dummy_mis)

# Preview the first few rows
head(mantar_dummy_full)
#>   Emotional reactivity Tendency toward worry Sensitivity to stress
#> 1          -0.08824641            -0.2659269            -1.2036137
#> 2          -0.44657803            -0.4588384            -0.2431794
#> 3          -1.06934325            -1.5050242            -0.8986388
#> 4           0.58282029            -0.5036316            -1.6020000
#> 5           0.58791759             0.5972580            -0.5882332
#> 6           0.10224725             0.1494428            -1.0877812
#>   Self-awareness  Moodiness Cautiousness Thoughtfulness about future challenges
#> 1     -2.3499259  0.6693700   0.04102854                              0.6484939
#> 2     -0.1656722 -0.3361568   0.88919849                              0.2949630
#> 3     -1.0857552  0.2249633   0.77060142                             -1.3519007
#> 4      1.0820676 -0.1858346  -0.03462852                             -0.4702988
#> 5      1.7461103  0.7160714   1.58280444                              0.9503597
#> 6     -1.7886107  1.3522197  -0.25494638                             -0.8938618
#>   Responsiveness to criticism
#> 1                 -0.77992262
#> 2                 -0.91747608
#> 3                  0.56000763
#> 4                  0.34653985
#> 5                  0.82981174
#> 6                 -0.01593388
head(mantar_dummy_mis)
#>   Emotional reactivity Tendency toward worry Sensitivity to stress
#> 1                   NA            -0.4376210            -0.5774722
#> 2           -1.7551688            -0.7039623             0.9070330
#> 3            2.0493638                    NA                    NA
#> 4                   NA                    NA                    NA
#> 5           -0.6338512             0.4361078            -0.5564631
#> 6            0.1054382             0.6935808             2.6557231
#>   Self-awareness  Moodiness Cautiousness Thoughtfulness about future challenges
#> 1     0.22292188  0.6614044           NA                              0.7710993
#> 2     0.03418623  0.6140406   0.83879818                             -1.5588119
#> 3             NA -0.8872971   0.04830719                                     NA
#> 4    -1.24779117 -0.7298623  -0.62263184                             -0.7100126
#> 5    -0.01032403         NA  -0.09690612                              1.0583312
#> 6             NA         NA  -0.04358574                                     NA
#>   Responsiveness to criticism
#> 1                  0.37233355
#> 2                 -0.55079199
#> 3                 -0.90103222
#> 4                  0.80773402
#> 5                  0.20820252
#> 6                 -0.03915726
```

The main function for estimating a network is `neighborhood_net()`. In
the case of fully observed data, the function takes the dataset as input
and estimates a network structure using **neighborhood selection**
guided by **information criteria**. With default arguments, only the
dataset needs to be provided.

#### Information Criteria

The `k` argument controls the penalty used in model selection for
node-wise regressions. It reflects the penalty per parameter (i.e.,
number of predictors + 1):

- `k = "log(n)"` (default): corresponds to the **Bayesian Information
  Criterion (BIC)**
- `k = "2"`: corresponds to the **Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)**

#### Estimation of Partial Correlation

The `pcor_merge_rule` argument determines how partial correlations are
estimated based on the regression results between two nodes:

- `"and"` (default): a partial correlation is estimated **only if both**
  regression weights (from node A to B and from B to A) are non-zero.
- `"or"`: a partial correlation is estimated if **at least one** of the
  two regression weights is non-zero.

Although both options are available, current simulation evidence
suggests that the `"and"` rule yields more accurate partial correlation
estimates than the `"or"` rule. Therefore, changing this default is
**not recommended** unless you have a specific reason.

### Example of Network Estimation without Missing Data

``` r
# Estimate network from full data set using BIC and and rule
result <- neighborhood_net(data = mantar_dummy_full, 
                           k = "log(n)", 
                           pcor_merge_rule = "and")
#> No missing values in data. Sample size for each variable is equal to the number of rows in the data.
# View estimated partial correlations
result$pcor
#>           [,1]      [,2]     [,3]      [,4]      [,5]      [,6]      [,7]
#> [1,] 0.0000000 0.2617524 0.130019 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.2617524 0.0000000 0.000000 0.2431947 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.2595917
#> [3,] 0.1300190 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000 0.2431947 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4377322 0.0000000
#> [6,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.4377322 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [7,] 0.0000000 0.2595917 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.2762595 0.2523658 0.0000000
#>           [,8]
#> [1,] 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.0000000
#> [3,] 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.2762595
#> [6,] 0.2523658
#> [7,] 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000
```

In the case of missing data, the `neighborhood_net()` function offers
several additional arguments that control how sample size and
missingness are handled.

#### Calculation of Sample Size

The `n_calc` argument specifies how the sample size is calculated for
each node-wise regression. This affects the penalty term used in model
selection.

The available options are:

- `"individual"` *(default)*: Uses the number of non-missing
  observations for each individual variable. This is the recommended
  approach.
- `"average"`: Uses the average number of non-missing observations
  across all variables.
- `"max"`: Uses the maximum number of non-missing observations across
  all variables.
- `"total"`: Uses the total number of observations in the dataset (i.e.,
  the number of rows).

#### Handling Missing Data

The `missing_handling` argument specifies how the correlation matrix is
estimated when the input data contains missing values. Two approaches
are supported:

- `"two-step-em"`: Applies a classic **Expectation-Maximization (EM)**
  algorithm to estimate the covariance matrix.
- `"stacked-mi"`: Applies **multiple imputation** to create several
  completed datasets, which are then stacked into a single dataset. A
  correlation matrix is computed from this stacked data.

If `"stacked-mi"` is used, the `nimp` argument controls the number of
imputations (default: `20`).

### Example of Network Estimation with Missing Data

``` r
# Estimate network for data set with missing values
result_mis <- neighborhood_net(data = mantar_dummy_mis, 
                                n_calc = "individual", 
                                missing_handling = "two-step-em", 
                                pcor_merge_rule = "and")
# View estimated partial correlations
result_mis$pcor
#>           [,1]      [,2]      [,3]      [,4]      [,5]      [,6]      [,7]
#> [1,] 0.0000000 0.1308241 0.2319812 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.1529808
#> [2,] 0.1308241 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.2609684 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.3022411
#> [3,] 0.2319812 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000 0.2609684 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4805308 0.0000000
#> [6,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4805308 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [7,] 0.1529808 0.3022411 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.3014538 0.2043425 0.2064012 0.0000000
#>           [,8]
#> [1,] 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.0000000
#> [3,] 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.3014538
#> [5,] 0.2043425
#> [6,] 0.2064012
#> [7,] 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000
```

Commit message:

Enable pairwise and listwise deletion for both regression and network model search.

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# mantar - Missingness Alleviation for NeTwork Analysis in R

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

`mantar` provides users with several methods for handling missing data
in the context of network analysis. Currently, these methods are
specifically implemented for network estimation via neighborhood
selection using the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC).

## Installation

You can install the development version of mantar from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("pak")
pak::pak("kai-nehler/mantar")
```

After installation the easiest way to get an overview of functions and
capabilities is to use `?mantar` to open the package help-file. You
could also read the rest of this README for an introduction and some
examples.

## Features

As already described, the package currently focuses on network
estimation using **neighborhood selection** with **information
criteria** for model selection in node-wise regressions. This
functionality is available for both complete and incomplete data.

For datasets with missing values, two modern missing approaches are
implemented:

- **Two-step Expectation-Maximization (EM):** A fast method that
  estimates the correlation matrix via an EM algorithm using the
  `lavaan` package. It performs well when the sample size is very large
  relative to the amount of missingness and the complexity of the
  network.
- **Stacked Multiple Imputation (MI):** A more robust approach across a
  wider range of sample sizes. Multiple imputation is performed using
  predictive mean matching (PMM) with the `mice` package. The imputed
  data sets are stacked into a single data set, and a correlation matrix
  is estimated from this combined data.

Both methods produce a correlation matrix that is then used to estimate
the network via node-wise regressions. It is also possible to compute
the correlation matrix using pairwise or listwise deletion. However,
these methods are generally not recommended, except in specific cases,
such as when data are missing completely at random and the proportion of
missingness is very small.

In addition to network estimation, the package also supports **stepwise
regression search** based on information criteria for a **single
dependent variable**. This regression search is available for both
complete and incomplete data and relies on the same two-step EM or
stacked MI procedures to handle missing values as the network analysis.
While both methods to handle missingness are expected to perform well in
this context, no specific simulation study has been conducted to compare
their effectiveness for single regression modeling, and thus their
relative strengths remain an open question.

## Example

The package includes two dummy datasets that resemble a typical
psychological dataset, where the number of observations is considerably
larger than the number of variables. Although the variables have
descriptive names, these are included solely to make the examples more
engaging - the data themselves are **fully synthetic**.

- `mantar_dummy_full`: Fully observed data (no missing values)
- `mantar_dummy_mis`: Data with missing values

These data sets are intended for examples and testing only.

``` r
library(mantar)

# Load example data
data(mantar_dummy_full)
data(mantar_dummy_mis)

# Preview the first few rows
head(mantar_dummy_full)
#>   Emotional reactivity Tendency toward worry Sensitivity to stress
#> 1          -0.08824641            -0.2659269            -1.2036137
#> 2          -0.44657803            -0.4588384            -0.2431794
#> 3          -1.06934325            -1.5050242            -0.8986388
#> 4           0.58282029            -0.5036316            -1.6020000
#> 5           0.58791759             0.5972580            -0.5882332
#> 6           0.10224725             0.1494428            -1.0877812
#>   Self-awareness  Moodiness Cautiousness Thoughtfulness about future challenges
#> 1     -2.3499259  0.6693700   0.04102854                              0.6484939
#> 2     -0.1656722 -0.3361568   0.88919849                              0.2949630
#> 3     -1.0857552  0.2249633   0.77060142                             -1.3519007
#> 4      1.0820676 -0.1858346  -0.03462852                             -0.4702988
#> 5      1.7461103  0.7160714   1.58280444                              0.9503597
#> 6     -1.7886107  1.3522197  -0.25494638                             -0.8938618
#>   Responsiveness to criticism
#> 1                 -0.77992262
#> 2                 -0.91747608
#> 3                  0.56000763
#> 4                  0.34653985
#> 5                  0.82981174
#> 6                 -0.01593388
head(mantar_dummy_mis)
#>   Emotional reactivity Tendency toward worry Sensitivity to stress
#> 1                   NA            -0.4376210            -0.5774722
#> 2           -1.7551688            -0.7039623             0.9070330
#> 3            2.0493638                    NA                    NA
#> 4                   NA                    NA                    NA
#> 5           -0.6338512             0.4361078            -0.5564631
#> 6            0.1054382             0.6935808             2.6557231
#>   Self-awareness  Moodiness Cautiousness Thoughtfulness about future challenges
#> 1     0.22292188  0.6614044           NA                              0.7710993
#> 2     0.03418623  0.6140406   0.83879818                             -1.5588119
#> 3             NA -0.8872971   0.04830719                                     NA
#> 4    -1.24779117 -0.7298623  -0.62263184                             -0.7100126
#> 5    -0.01032403         NA  -0.09690612                              1.0583312
#> 6             NA         NA  -0.04358574                                     NA
#>   Responsiveness to criticism
#> 1                  0.37233355
#> 2                 -0.55079199
#> 3                 -0.90103222
#> 4                  0.80773402
#> 5                  0.20820252
#> 6                 -0.03915726
```

The main function for estimating a network is `neighborhood_net()`. In
the case of fully observed data, the function takes the dataset as input
and estimates a network structure using **neighborhood selection**
guided by **information criteria**. With default arguments, only the
dataset needs to be provided.

#### Information Criteria

The `k` argument controls the penalty used in model selection for
node-wise regressions. It reflects the penalty per parameter (i.e.,
number of predictors + 1):

- `k = "log(n)"` (default): corresponds to the **Bayesian Information
  Criterion (BIC)**
- `k = "2"`: corresponds to the **Akaike Information Criterion (AIC)**

#### Estimation of Partial Correlation

The `pcor_merge_rule` argument determines how partial correlations are
estimated based on the regression results between two nodes:

- `"and"` (default): a partial correlation is estimated **only if both**
  regression weights (from node A to B and from B to A) are non-zero.
- `"or"`: a partial correlation is estimated if **at least one** of the
  two regression weights is non-zero.

Although both options are available, current simulation evidence
suggests that the `"and"` rule yields more accurate partial correlation
estimates than the `"or"` rule. Therefore, changing this default is
**not recommended** unless you have a specific reason.

### Example of Network Estimation without Missing Data

``` r
# Estimate network from full data set using BIC and and rule
result <- neighborhood_net(data = mantar_dummy_full, 
                           k = "log(n)", 
                           pcor_merge_rule = "and")
#> No missing values in data. Sample size for each variable is equal to the number of rows in the data.
# View estimated partial correlations
result$pcor
#>           [,1]      [,2]     [,3]      [,4]      [,5]      [,6]      [,7]
#> [1,] 0.0000000 0.2617524 0.130019 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.2617524 0.0000000 0.000000 0.2431947 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.2595917
#> [3,] 0.1300190 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000 0.2431947 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4377322 0.0000000
#> [6,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.4377322 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [7,] 0.0000000 0.2595917 0.000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.000000 0.0000000 0.2762595 0.2523658 0.0000000
#>           [,8]
#> [1,] 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.0000000
#> [3,] 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.2762595
#> [6,] 0.2523658
#> [7,] 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000
```

In the case of missing data, the `neighborhood_net()` function offers
several additional arguments that control how sample size and
missingness are handled.

#### Calculation of Sample Size

The `n_calc` argument specifies how the sample size is calculated for
each node-wise regression. This affects the penalty term used in model
selection.

The available options are:

- `"individual"` *(default)*: Uses the number of non-missing
  observations for each individual variable. This is the recommended
  approach.
- `"average"`: Uses the average number of non-missing observations
  across all variables.
- `"max"`: Uses the maximum number of non-missing observations across
  all variables.
- `"total"`: Uses the total number of observations in the dataset (i.e.,
  the number of rows).

#### Handling Missing Data

The `missing_handling` argument specifies how the correlation matrix is
estimated when the input data contains missing values. Two approaches
are supported:

- `"two-step-em"`: Applies a classic **Expectation-Maximization (EM)**
  algorithm to estimate the covariance matrix.
- `"stacked-mi"`: Applies **multiple imputation** to create several
  completed datasets, which are then stacked into a single dataset. A
  correlation matrix is computed from this stacked data.

If `"stacked-mi"` is used, the `nimp` argument controls the number of
imputations (default: `20`).

### Example of Network Estimation with Missing Data

``` r
# Estimate network for data set with missing values
result_mis <- neighborhood_net(data = mantar_dummy_mis, 
                                n_calc = "individual", 
                                missing_handling = "two-step-em", 
                                pcor_merge_rule = "and")
# View estimated partial correlations
result_mis$pcor
#>           [,1]      [,2]      [,3]      [,4]      [,5]      [,6]      [,7]
#> [1,] 0.0000000 0.1308241 0.2319812 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.1529808
#> [2,] 0.1308241 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.2609684 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.3022411
#> [3,] 0.2319812 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.0000000 0.2609684 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [5,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4805308 0.0000000
#> [6,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.4805308 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [7,] 0.1529808 0.3022411 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.0000000 0.3014538 0.2043425 0.2064012 0.0000000
#>           [,8]
#> [1,] 0.0000000
#> [2,] 0.0000000
#> [3,] 0.0000000
#> [4,] 0.3014538
#> [5,] 0.2043425
#> [6,] 0.2064012
#> [7,] 0.0000000
#> [8,] 0.0000000
```
